Title: [3] Logging system and logging convention
Author: Jiang ZiJian
Date: 2024-03-29 11:06
Category: Standards Track
Tags: Standards Track, Draft

## Abstract

This document proposes four levels of logging and other logging conventions should
be applyed in application.

## Logging levels

The document outlines four levels of logging, `debug`, `info`, `warning`, `error`
, to provide a structured approach to logging that facilitates debugging,
monitoring, and troubleshooting of the application.

Debug: This level is used for detailed debugging information. It's typically
used during development or when diagnosing specific issues, providing developers
with granular insight into the application's behavior.

Info: The info level is for general informational messages that highlight the
application's runtime behavior. It provides essential insights into the
application's operations, such as startup/shutdown events or significant
milestones.

Warning: Warnings indicate potential issues or anomalies that may not prevent
the application from functioning but warrant attention. They serve as early
indicators of potential problems or unexpected behavior.

Error: The error level is reserved for critical errors or exceptions that require
immediate attention. These messages indicate failures or issues that impact the
application's functionality and may require intervention to resolve.

## Logging message convention

### Plugin name prefix

In a plugin-based system, it's essential for logging messages to be prefixed with
the plugin name. This practice ensures clear and identifiable log entries,
enabling developers and administrators to easily trace the origin of each message
back to its respective plugin. By including the plugin name as a prefix, log
entries become more organized and contextual, enhancing readability and
simplifying debugging and troubleshooting efforts.

In cases where a specific plugin is not applicable, users should utilize a name
that is easily understandable and relevant to the context. This ensures that log
entries remain informative and intuitive, even when they are not associated with
a particular plugin.

### Timestamp prefix

Prefixing each logged message with a timestamp is a common practice to provide
users with a clear timeline of events. This timestamp allows users to understand
when each message occurred in relation to other events, aiding in debugging,
monitoring, and analysis.

### Process id prefix

Prefixing logged messages with the process ID (PID) is indeed beneficial,
particularly in environments with multiple concurrently running processes or
instances. This practice aids in distinguishing log entries originating from
different processes. In an Integrated Development Environment (IDE) system,
various components such as the language server, debugger, and terminal pty
process are typically spawned by the IDE itself.

### Blank line

Adding a blank line between two logging messages enhances readability and makes
it easier for users to distinguish between individual log entries.

## Feature

### Logging to a file

Logging to a file ensures that log messages are persisted beyond the current
session. This is particularly useful for tracking historical data, diagnosing
intermittent issues, and auditing application activity over time.


## Logging example

```
I+00001.710: 35790¬ [app] Installing plugin 'webbrowser'...

I+00001.710: 35790¬ [editorstack] Register editor 'Web Browser' for content type 'text/x-html' with name files ['*.html', '*.htm'].
...
D+00003.568: 37910¬ [app] <bound method CodeInsight.onAppearanceThemeOptionChanged of <cshore.codeinsight.plugin.CodeInsight object at 0x12184f1c0>> is observing "theme" in section "appearance"
```


## Rule of thumb

** 1. Log messages when there is a problem or an unexpected event occurs, but not
logging success. **

Following the philosophy of Unix programs, which emphasizes the principle of
silence when everything is working as expected Minimizes unnecessary noise in the
logs and ensures that important information stands out.

** 2. One user action must only return one message. **

Following the principle that one action should only return one message, each
logged message will correspond to a specific action or event, providing clear
and concise information. This helps maintain clarity and simplicity in the log
output, making it easier to understand and troubleshoot issues when they arise.

** 3. User action must be logged. **

Log user interactions or actions that may have consequences within the
application. This helps in understanding user behavior and diagnosing
user-reported issues.

** 4. When you meet a problem twice and can only find out why by debugging into
the source code, you log.**

Encountering problems can highlight the need for additional logging.